Add in Blog Post for SegMoE: Segmind Mixture of Diffusion Experts (#1781)
huggingface/blog: segmoe.md

---
title: "SegMoE: Segmind Mixture of Diffusion Experts"
thumbnail: /blog/assets/segmoe/thumbnail.png
authors:
- user: Warlord-K
  guest: true
- user: Gothos
  guest: true
- user: harishsegmind
  guest: true
---

# SegMoE: Segmind Mixture of Diffusion Experts

> SegMoE is an exciting framework for creating Mixture-of-Experts Diffusion models from scratch! SegMoE is comprehensively integrated with the Hugging Face ecosystem 🔥!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SegMoE is an exciting framework for creating Mixture-of-Experts Diffusion models from scratch! SegMoE is comprehensively integrated within the Hugging Face ecosystem and comes supported with `diffusers` 🔥!
```

Among the features and integrations being released today:

> - [Models on the Hub](https://huggingface.co/models?search=segmind/SegMoE), with their model cards and licenses (Apache 2.0)

Author: Added

For more details on MoEs, see the Hugging Face 🤗 post: [hf.co/blog/moe](https://huggingface.co/blog/moe)

**SegMoE release TL;DR;**

- Release of SegMoE 4x2, SegMoE 2x1 and SegMoE SD4x2 versions
- Release of custom MoE-making code

### About the name

The SegMoE MoEs is called **SegMoE-AxB**, where A refers to the number of expert models MoE-d together, while the second number refers to the number of experts involved in the generation of each image. Only some layers of the model (the feed-forward blocks, attentions, or all) are replicated depending on the configuration settings; the rest of the parameters are the same as in a Stable Diffusion model. For more details about how MoE works, please refer to [the "Mixture of Experts Explained" post](https://huggingface.co/blog/moe).

## Inference
We release 3 merges on Hugging Face:

1. [SegMoE 2x1](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-2x1-v0) has two expert models.
2. [SegMoE 4x2](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-4x2-v0) has four expert models.
3. [SegMoE SD 4x2](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-SD-4x2-v0) has four Stable Diffusion 1.5 expert models.

> ### Using 🤗 Diffusers

Author: Added Local Inference section

Please run the following command to install the segmoe package. Make sure you have the latest version of diffusers and transformers installed.
```pip install segmoe```
The following loads up and inferences the third model in the above list.
```python
from segmoe import SegMoEPipeline

pipeline = SegMoEPipeline("segmind/SegMoE-4x2-v0", device = "cuda")

prompt = "cosmic canvas, orange city background, painting of a chubby cat"
negative_prompt = "nsfw, bad quality, worse quality"
img = pipeline(
    prompt=prompt,
    negative_prompt=negative_prompt,
    height=1024,
    width=1024,
    num_inference_steps=25,
    guidance_scale=7.5,
).images[0]

> img.save("image.png")

Author: Added

```

## Samples

![image](https://cdn-uploads.huggingface.co/production/uploads/62f8ca074588fe31f4361dae/HgF6DLC-_3igZT6kFIq4J.png)

![image](https://cdn-uploads.huggingface.co/production/uploads/62f8ca074588fe31f4361dae/ofIz_6VehCHRlpsfrxwFm.png)

> ![image](https://cdn-uploads.huggingface.co/production/uploads/62f8ca074588fe31f4361dae/z6T2lYPlbXifoh_D5EkLZ.png)

Author: Added Captions

## Comparison 

The Prompt Understanding seems to improve as shown in the images below. From Left to Right [SegMoE-2x1-v0](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-2x1-v0), [SegMoE-4x2-v0](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-4x2-v0), Base Model ([RealVisXL_V3.0](https://huggingface.co/SG161222/RealVisXL_V3.0))

![image](https://github.com/segmind/segmoe/assets/95569637/bcdc1b11-bbf5-4947-b6bb-9f745ff0c040)

<div align="center">three green glass bottles</div>
<br>

![image](https://github.com/segmind/segmoe/assets/95569637/d50e2af0-66d2-4112-aa88-bd4df88cbd5e)

<div align="center">panda bear with aviator glasses on its head</div>
<br>

![image](https://github.com/segmind/segmoe/assets/95569637/aba2954a-80c2-428a-bf76-0a70a5e03e9b)

<div align="center">the statue of Liberty next to the Washington Monument</div>

![image](https://github.com/Warlord-K/blog/assets/95569637/f113f804-8217-4b7f-b3a5-213b658697d1)

<div align="center">Taj Mahal with its reflection. detailed charcoal sketch.</div>

> ## Creating your Own Model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Creating your Own SegMoE
```

> Create a yaml config file, config.yaml, with the following structure:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Simply prepare a `config.yaml` file, with the following structure:
```

num_experts: Number of experts to use
moe_layers: Type of Layers to Mix (can be "ff", "attn" or "all"). Defaults to "attn"
num_experts_per_tok: Number of Experts to use 
experts:
  - source_model: Expert 1 Path, Model Card or CivitAI Download Link
    positive_prompt: Positive Prompt for computing gate weights
    negative_prompt: Negative Prompt for computing gate weights
  - source_model: Expert 2 Path, Model Card or CivitAI Download Link
    positive_prompt: Positive Prompt for computing gate weights
    negative_prompt: Negative Prompt for computing gate weights
  - source_model: Expert 3 Path, Model Card or CivitAI Download Link
    positive_prompt: Positive Prompt for computing gate weights
    negative_prompt: Negative Prompt for computing gate weights
  - source_model: Expert 4 Path, Model Card or CivitAI Download Link
    positive_prompt: Positive Prompt for computing gate weights
    negative_prompt: Negative Prompt for computing gate weights
```

Any number of models can be combined. For detailed information on how to create a config file, please refer to the [github repository](https://github.com/segmind/segmoe)

**Note**

> Both Huggingface Models and CivitAI Models are supported. For CivitAI models, paste the download link of the model, For Example: "https://civitai.com/api/download/models/239306"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both Huggingface Models and CivitAI Models are supported. For CivitAI models, paste the download link of the model, for example: "https://civitai.com/api/download/models/239306"
```

Then run the following command:

```bash
segmoe config.yaml segmoe_v0
```

> This will create a folder called segmoe_v0 with the following structure:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

This will create a folder called `segmoe_v0` with the following structure:
```

Where is the name taken from?

```bash
├── model_index.json
├── scheduler
│   └── scheduler_config.json
├── text_encoder
│   ├── config.json
│   └── model.safetensors
├── text_encoder_2
│   ├── config.json
│   └── model.safetensors
├── tokenizer
│   ├── merges.txt
│   ├── special_tokens_map.json
│   ├── tokenizer_config.json
│   └── vocab.json
├── tokenizer_2
│   ├── merges.txt
│   ├── special_tokens_map.json
│   ├── tokenizer_config.json
│   └── vocab.json
├── unet
│   ├── config.json
│   └── diffusion_pytorch_model.safetensors
└──vae
    ├── config.json
    └── diffusion_pytorch_model.safetensors
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: create a model card (README.md) as part of the process that documents the models used for the mixture, maybe the prompts used, and, importantly, the tags so they include SegMoE, moe, etc. This would be uploaded to the hub with either the CLI or the Python api.

Reviewer: +1. Maybe this could be integrated in the next version of the library.

> Alternatively, you can also use the following command to create a mixture of experts model:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, you can also use the Python API to create a mixture of experts model:
```

```python
from segmoe import SegMoEPipeline

pipeline = SegMoEPipeline("config.yaml", device="cuda")

pipeline.save_pretrained("segmoe_v0")
```

### Push to Hub

> The Model can be pushed to the hub via the huggingface-cli

Reviewer 2: Also from Python, I assume. Can we show an example of that?

Author: Added pushing using Python API

```bash 
huggingface-cli upload segmind/segmoe_v0 ./segmoe_v0
```

Detailed usage can be found [here](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/guides/upload)

## Disclaimers and ongoing work

> - **Slower Speed**: MoEs may perform computation step across several expert models (if the number of experts per token is set to higher than 1). This makes the model slower than a single SD 1.5 or SDXL model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Slower Speed**: If the number of experts per token is larger than 1, the MoE performs computation across several expert models. This makes it slower than a single SD 1.5 or SDXL model.
```

> - **High VRAM usage**: MoEs run inference very quickly but still need a large amount of VRAM (and hence an expensive GPU). This makes it challenging to use it in local setups. MoEs are great for setups with many devices and large VRAM. SegMoE-4x2 requires 24GB of VRAM in half-precision.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **High VRAM usage**: MoEs run inference very quickly but still need a large amount of VRAM (and hence an expensive GPU). This makes it challenging to use them in local setups, but they are great for deployments with multiple GPUs. As a reference point, SegMoE-4x2 requires 24GB of VRAM in half-precision.
```

## Conclusion

SegMoE is a framework built to provide the community with a new tool which potentially can create SOTA Models by using pretrained models while keeping the inference times low.

> ## Additional Resources

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

## Additional Resources
```

> - [Mixture of Experts Explained](https://huggingface.co/blog/moe)

Reviewer 2: maybe link again to the github repo and the Hub filter.

## Inference

We release 3 merges on the Hub:

1. [SegMoE 2x1](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-2x1-v0) has two expert models.
2. [SegMoE 4x2](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-4x2-v0) has four expert models.
3. [SegMoE SD 4x2](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-SD-4x2-v0) has four Stable Diffusion 1.5 expert models.

### Samples

Images generated using [SegMoE 4x2](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-4x2-v0)

![image](https://cdn-uploads.huggingface.co/production/uploads/62f8ca074588fe31f4361dae/HgF6DLC-_3igZT6kFIq4J.png)

Images generated using [SegMoE 2x1](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-2x1-v0):

![image](https://cdn-uploads.huggingface.co/production/uploads/62f8ca074588fe31f4361dae/ofIz_6VehCHRlpsfrxwFm.png)

Images generated using [SegMoE SD 4x2](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-SD-4x2-v0)

![image](https://cdn-uploads.huggingface.co/production/uploads/62f8ca074588fe31f4361dae/z6T2lYPlbXifoh_D5EkLZ.png)

### Using 🤗 Diffusers

Please, run the following command to install the `segmoe` package. Make sure you have the latest version of `diffusers` and `transformers` installed.
```bash
pip install -U segmoe diffusers transformers

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```

- [Github Repository](https://github.com/segmind/segmoe) to create your own MoE-style models.
 
## Table of Contents

- [What is SegMoE](#what-is-segmoe)
  - [About the name](#about-the-name)
- [Inference](#inference)
  - [Samples](#Samples)
  - [Using 🤗 Diffusers](#using-🤗-diffusers)
  - [Using a Local Model](#using-a-local-model)
- [Comparison](#comparison)
- [Creating your Own SegMoE](#creating-your-own-segmoe)
- [Disclaimers and ongoing work](#disclaimers-and-ongoing-work)
- [Additional Resources](#additional-resources)
- [Conclusion](#conclusion)

## What is SegMoE?

SegMoE models follow the same architecture as Stable Diffusion. Like [Mixtral 8x7b](https://huggingface.co/blog/mixtral), a SegMoE model comes with multiple models in one. The way this works is by replacing some Feed-Forward layers with a sparse MoE layer. A MoE layer contains a router network to select which experts process which tokens most efficiently.
You can use the `segmoe` package to create your own MoE models! The process takes just a few minutes. For further information, please visit [the Github Repository](https://github.com/segmind/segmoe)

> For more details on MoEs, see the Hugging Face 🤗 post: [hf.co/blog/moe](https://huggingface.co/blog/moe)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details on MoEs, see the Hugging Face 🤗 post: [hf.co/blog/moe](https://huggingface.co/blog/moe).
```

**SegMoE release TL;DR;**

- Release of SegMoE-4x2, SegMoE-2x1 and SegMoE-SD4x2 versions
- Release of custom MoE-making code

### About the name

The SegMoE MoEs are called **SegMoE-AxB**, where `A` refers to the number of expert models MoE-d together, while the second number refers to the number of experts involved in the generation of each image. Only some layers of the model (the feed-forward blocks, attentions, or all) are replicated depending on the configuration settings; the rest of the parameters are the same as in a Stable Diffusion model. For more details about how MoEs work, please refer to [the "Mixture of Experts Explained" post](https://huggingface.co/blog/moe).

## Inference

> We release 3 merges on Hugging Face:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We release 3 merges on the Hub:
```

1. [SegMoE 2x1](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-2x1-v0) has two expert models.
2. [SegMoE 4x2](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-4x2-v0) has four expert models.
3. [SegMoE SD 4x2](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-SD-4x2-v0) has four Stable Diffusion 1.5 expert models.

### Samples

Images generated using [SegMoE 4x2](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-4x2-v0)

> ![image](https://cdn-uploads.huggingface.co/production/uploads/62f8ca074588fe31f4361dae/HgF6DLC-_3igZT6kFIq4J.png)

Reviewer 2: This is fine, but I forgot to mention: if you want to use new images not available in the model cards, you can open a PR to [this dataset](https://huggingface.co/datasets/huggingface/documentation-images).

Reviewer 2: Also, no need to change, but you can use captions if you want using a Markdown table [like here](https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/fd611f6200391b865641c4e7a38e1ea47ec4bc6c/pref-tuning.md?plain=1#L31), or HTML [like here](https://github.com/huggingface/blog/blob/fd611f6200391b865641c4e7a38e1ea47ec4bc6c/moe.md?plain=1#L65).

Author: Cool, I will keep in mind for later

Images generated using [SegMoE 2x1](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-2x1-v0):

![image](https://cdn-uploads.huggingface.co/production/uploads/62f8ca074588fe31f4361dae/ofIz_6VehCHRlpsfrxwFm.png)

Images generated using [SegMoE SD 4x2](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-SD-4x2-v0)

![image](https://cdn-uploads.huggingface.co/production/uploads/62f8ca074588fe31f4361dae/z6T2lYPlbXifoh_D5EkLZ.png)

### Using 🤗 Diffusers

> Please, run the following command to install the segmoe package. Make sure you have the latest version of diffusers and transformers installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Please, run the following command to install the `segmoe` package. Make sure you have the latest version of `diffusers` and `transformers` installed.
```

> ```pip install segmoe```

Reviewer: ```bash
pip install -U segmoe transformers diffusers
```

> ```pip install segmoe```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```bash
pip install -U segmoe diffusers transformers
```
```

> The following loads up the Second model from the list above, and runs generation on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following loads up the second model ("SegMoE 4x2") from the list above, and runs generation on it.
```

```python
from segmoe import SegMoEPipeline

pipeline = SegMoEPipeline("segmind/SegMoE-4x2-v0", device="cuda")

prompt = "cosmic canvas, orange city background, painting of a chubby cat"
negative_prompt = "nsfw, bad quality, worse quality"
img = pipeline(
    prompt=prompt,
    negative_prompt=negative_prompt,
    height=1024,
    width=1024,
    num_inference_steps=25,
    guidance_scale=7.5,
).images[0]
img.save("image.png")
```

![image](https://github.com/Warlord-K/blog/assets/95569637/93e7c4a2-9012-44c3-b778-e5363ad5556c)

### Using a Local Model

> Alternatively, A Local Model can also be loaded up, here `segmoe_v0` is the path to the directory containing the local SegMoE model. Checkout [Creating your Own SegMoE](#creating-your-own-segmoe) to learn how to create your own SegMoE model.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, a local model can also be loaded up, here `segmoe_v0` is the path to the directory containing the local SegMoE model. Checkout [Creating your Own SegMoE](#creating-your-own-segmoe) to learn how to build your own!
```

```python
from segmoe import SegMoEPipeline

pipeline = SegMoEPipeline("segmoe_v0", device="cuda")

prompt = "cosmic canvas, orange city background, painting of a chubby cat"
negative_prompt = "nsfw, bad quality, worse quality"
img = pipeline(
    prompt=prompt,
    negative_prompt=negative_prompt,
    height=1024,
    width=1024,
    num_inference_steps=25,
    guidance_scale=7.5,
).images[0]
img.save("image.png")
```

## Comparison 

Prompt understanding seems to improve, as shown in the images below. Each image shows the following models left to right: [SegMoE-2x1-v0](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-2x1-v0), [SegMoE-4x2-v0](https://huggingface.co/segmind/SegMoE-4x2-v0), Base Model ([RealVisXL_V3.0](https://huggingface.co/SG161222/RealVisXL_V3.0))

![image](https://github.com/segmind/segmoe/assets/95569637/bcdc1b11-bbf5-4947-b6bb-9f745ff0c040)

<div align="center">three green glass bottles</div>

> <br>

Reviewer 2: Not sure how this will be rendered by the blog engine, I'll test in Codespaces in a bit.

num_experts: Number of experts to use
moe_layers: Type of Layers to Mix (can be "ff", "attn" or "all"). Defaults to "attn"
num_experts_per_tok: Number of Experts to use 
experts:
  - source_model: Expert 1 Path, Model Card or CivitAI Download Link
    positive_prompt: Positive Prompt for computing gate weights
    negative_prompt: Negative Prompt for computing gate weights
  - source_model: Expert 2 Path, Model Card or CivitAI Download Link
    positive_prompt: Positive Prompt for computing gate weights
    negative_prompt: Negative Prompt for computing gate weights
  - source_model: Expert 3 Path, Model Card or CivitAI Download Link
    positive_prompt: Positive Prompt for computing gate weights
    negative_prompt: Negative Prompt for computing gate weights
  - source_model: Expert 4 Path, Model Card or CivitAI Download Link
    positive_prompt: Positive Prompt for computing gate weights
    negative_prompt: Negative Prompt for computing gate weights
```

Any number of models can be combined. For detailed information on how to create a config file, please refer to the [github repository](https://github.com/segmind/segmoe)

**Note**

> Both Huggingface Models and CivitAI Models are supported. For CivitAI models, paste the download link of the model, for example: "https://civitai.com/api/download/models/239306"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Both Hugging Face and CivitAI models are supported. For CivitAI models, paste the download link of the model, for example: "https://civitai.com/api/download/models/239306"
```

Then run the following command:

```bash
segmoe config.yaml segmoe_v0
```

This will create a folder called `segmoe_v0` with the following structure:

```bash
├── model_index.json
├── scheduler
│   └── scheduler_config.json
├── text_encoder
│   ├── config.json
│   └── model.safetensors
├── text_encoder_2
│   ├── config.json
│   └── model.safetensors
├── tokenizer
│   ├── merges.txt
│   ├── special_tokens_map.json
│   ├── tokenizer_config.json
│   └── vocab.json
├── tokenizer_2
│   ├── merges.txt
│   ├── special_tokens_map.json
│   ├── tokenizer_config.json
│   └── vocab.json
├── unet
│   ├── config.json
│   └── diffusion_pytorch_model.safetensors
└──vae
    ├── config.json
    └── diffusion_pytorch_model.safetensors
```

Alternatively, you can also use the Python API to create a mixture of experts model:

```python
from segmoe import SegMoEPipeline

pipeline = SegMoEPipeline("config.yaml", device="cuda")

> pipeline.save_pretrained("segmoe_v0")

Reviewer: If you do `push_to_hub=True` in `save_pretrained()`, it will automatically push to the Hub given you're authenticated.

Author: This is the save pretrained of the SegMoEPipeline class which we have implemented, we havent added the push_to_hub functionality to that yet, hence we haven't mentioned that.

Reviewer: If you subclass from `DiffusionPipeline` it's already there :-)

```

### Push to Hub

The Model can be pushed to the hub via the huggingface-cli

```bash 
huggingface-cli upload segmind/segmoe_v0 ./segmoe_v0
```

> Alternatively, The Model can be pushed via the Python API,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The model can also be pushed to the Hub directly from Python:
```

```python
from huggingface_hub import create_repo, upload_folder
 
model_id = "segmind/SegMoE-v0"

> repo_id = create_repo(
>                 repo_id = model_id, exist_ok=True
>             ).repo_id

Reviewer: ```suggestion
repo_id = create_repo(repo_id=model_id, exist_ok=True).repo_id
```
